h1. Using java.math.BigDecimal in Siean

h2. <a>Code sample</a>

Here is a superclass:

bc.. @Table("big_decimal")
public class BigDecimalModel {

	@Id(Generator.AUTO_INCREMENT)
	public Long id;
	
	// stores using the db native default type
	public BigDecimal big1;

	// stores using the db native type with a (size,scale)=(21,10)
	@DecimalPrecision(storateType=StorageType.NATIVE, size=21, scale=10)
	public BigDecimal big2;
	
	// stores as double
	@DecimalPrecision(storateType=StorageType.DOUBLE)
	public BigDecimal big3;
	
	// stores as plain string
	@DecimalPrecision(storateType=StorageType.STRING)
		
	...
}

p. 

==<br/>==

h2. <a>@DecimalPrecision Annotation</a>

Here is the definition of @DecimalPrecision:

bc.. public @interface DecimalPrecision {
	public enum StorageType {
		NATIVE,	// NATIVE means it uses native DB storage for bigdecimal: for SQL: SQL type DECIMAL - for GAE:String 
		DOUBLE, // stored as a double
		STRING	// stored as a string (not padded with 0 yet)
	}
	
	StorageType storateType() default StorageType.NATIVE;
	int size() default 19;
	int scale() default 2;
}

p. 
==<br/>==

h3. <a>Size & Scale</a>

* **size** is the total of digits in the BigDecimal

bc. 123456.789 -> size = 9

* **scale** is the number of digits to the right of the decimal point

bc. 123456.789 -> scale = 3

p(note). **Note** Default (size, scale) is (19, 2) for the reason that this is the default precision used by Oracle and that I found it on several web sites but this is quite arbitrary.

p(note). **Note** Be careful when setting couple (size, scale) because you can't assign bigger numbers than the range authorised by it.

==<br/>==

h3. <a>Storage Type</a>

BigDecimal in Siena can be stored into DB using 3 storage types:
* **Native** uses the native type proposed by the underlying DB:
** __RDBMS__ proposes a standard SQL type __DECIMAL(size, scale)__ where __size__ and __scale__ .
** __GAE__ doesn't provide BigDecimal support so the default chosen storage type is __String__

* **String** stores the BigDecimal into a plain String

bc. -1.2345678E4 -> -12345.678

* **Double** stores the BigDecimal into a double: **Be careful of approximations** linked to rounding mechanism used by __java.math.BigDecimal__ when converting BigDecimal into other types. You can lose some information. For example, you could have:

bc. 123456789.0123456890 -> 123456789.01234569


