h1. <a name="query-main">Using Query</a>

h2. <a name="query-summary">Summary</a>

p(note). @Query<T>@ is the main entry point for:
* *Fetching/iterating/paginating/counting* through those multiple entities
* *Updating/deleting* multiple entities depending on criteria (filters, orders, aggregators, owners...)

@Query<T>@ provides:
* *Fluent API* (each functions of query returns a @Query<T>@) to refine the criteria of the query.
* *Terminal actions* to fulfill the real business job of fetching/iterating over entities in the datastore 

@Query<T>@ instances are:
* *NOT THREADSAFE* because they may keep a context (for pagination for ex) so don't call one instance of query from multiple thread or do it because you know what you do.
* *Stateless by default* regarding offsets/limits/cursors (not for pagination naturally) so each call to a query terminal action starts at first entity again.
* *Stateful on demand* regarding offsets/limits so it keeps the current limit/offset/cursor in the DB.


h2. <a name="query-get">Creating a @Query<T>@</a>

bc. Query<YourModel> query = Model.all(YourModel.class);

Sometimes, you are lazy (like me) and don't want to repeat the classname in the all(). Thus, in your Model, you can override this function by a simpler one:

bc.. public class YourModel extends Model{
...
	Query<YourModel> all() { return Model.all(YourModel.class); }	
...
}


p. 


h2. <a name="query-basic">Basic features of @Query<T>@</a>

h3. <a name="query-basic-fetch">Fetch entities of a class in a list</a>

bc.. List<YourModel> objects = Model.all(YourModel.class).fetch();
for(YourModel obj: objects{
...
// DOIT
...
}

// you can also set a limit in the number of objects
List<YourModel> objects_0_10 = Model.all(YourModel.class).fetch(10);

// you can also set a limit and an offset in the number of objects
List<YourModel> objects_5_15 = Model.all(YourModel.class).fetch(10, 5);

p. 

p. In this case, you don't add any filtering criterion so you retrieve all entities. Be careful if the number of such entities is huge!

==<br/>==

h3. <a name="query-basic-iter">Iterate through entities of a class</a>

bc.. Iterable<YourModel> iter = Model.all(YourModel.class).iter();
Iterator<YourModel> it = iter.iterator();

while(it.hasNext()) {
YourModel obj = it.next();
...

// DOIT
...
}

// you can also set a limit in the number of objects
Iterable<YourModel> iter_0_10 = Model.all(YourModel.class).iter(10);

// you can also set a limit and an offset in the number of objects
Iterable<YourModel> iter_5_15 = Model.all(YourModel.class).iter(10, 5);


p. 

bq.. *Understand difference between iter and fetch* :
 - _fetch_ performs the datastore query and _retrieves all raw entities_ and then _immediately maps them_ into your Java models. If you have lots of results and heavy models, the mapping can be quite long.
 - _iter_ performs the datastore query and r_etrieves all raw entities BUT IT DOESN'T MAP them_ into Java models immediately. The mapping is performed at each call to @it.next()@. Thus, if the mapping is long, you can split the mapping load across your code.
 
p. 

==<br/>==

h3. <a name="query-basic-fetch">Get the first model of a class</a>

bc.. YourModel object = Model.all(YourModel.class).get(); 

p. It returns the first model retrieved from the datastore according to its index for these entities.

==<br/>==

h3. <a name="query-basic-filter">Filter on a field</a>

bc.. List<YourModel> objects = Model.all(YourModel.class).filter("myField", "myValue").fetch();

p. It returns the entities have @myField@ value equal to @myValue@.

p. The filter is done on the name of the field so be careful not to type a wrong name. This is a limitation of Java which is not a language allowing to create dynamic type safe APIs.

p. The value to filter on is an object and can be of any type: a Long, a Double, another model for relations etc...

==<br/>==

h3. <a name="query-basic-order">Order on a field</a>

bc.. List<YourModel> objects = Model.all(YourModel.class).order("myField-").fetch();
 
p. It returns the entities in descendant order according to @myField@.
 
==<br/>==

h3. <a name="query-basic-order">Paginate your entities</a>

bc.. Query<YourModel> query = Model.all(YourModel.class).paginate(10);
List<YourModel> firstPage = query.fetch();
List<YourModel> secondPage = query.nextPage().fetch();
Iterable<YourModel> thirdPage query.nextPage().iter();
List<YourModel> secondPageAgain = query.previousPage().fetch();
...
 
p. Here you can easily understand the query keeps in memory the context of the current page to be able to go to next or previous page. 
  
==<br/>==

h3. <a name="query-basic-count">Count all entities of a class</a>

bc.. in nb = Model.all(YourModel.class).count();

p. It returns the number of entities.
 
==<br/>==

h3. <a name="query-basic-delete">Delete all entities of a class</a>

bc.. in nbDeleted = Model.all(YourModel.class).delete();

p. It returns the number of entities deleted.
 
==<br/>== 

h2. <a name="query-detailed">Detailed features of @Query<T>@</a>
 
bq. First remind that you can mix almost all those functions with each other. If you mix something forbidden, don't worry, Siena will throw an Exception to tell you!

*UNDER CONSTRUCTION*
*TO BE CONTINUED...* 