h1. <a name="relation-syntax-many">Using the new syntax *Many&lt;T&gt;*</a>

bq. *This syntax is only available for GAE implementation for the time being but will be ported soon to other impl*

h3. Description

* @Many<T>@ represents the relation itself from the owner/aggregator entity to the owned or aggregated children entities in a One2Many/Many2One relation.
* @Many<T>@ is set on the owner side in a multiple owned relation.
* @Many<T>@ is set on the aggregator side in a multiple aggregated relation.
* @Many<T>@ provides a lazy way to retrieve the children of the relation/aggregation as a List or as a Query.

p(note). *Note* with @Many<T>@, you don't have to choose in your model how you want to manipulate your child entities: you will be able to do it through a simple list retrieved at once or through a query with limits, offsets, filters, ordering etc... 

bq. *Keep in mind that Siena just manages the relation but not the objects themselves*

h3. Siena DOES

* _manage the relation_ but not the full life-cycle of related entities (you must manage their updates for ex).
* _manage relation change_ when you add a child to the One2Many relation. 
* _auto-insert the related entities_ at the same time as the parent (or when updating the parent) if not inserted yet.
* _lazy-load the related entities_ only when required.
* _delete-cascade the aggregated entities_ because an aggregated entity can't exist outside its aggregator. *This is the ONLY accepted delete cascade*. 

h3. Siena DOESN'T

* _manage the updates of data within the related entities_. You must save them yourself.
* _delete the owned entities when you delete the owner_ since an owned entity can change owner. Nevertheless, the owned entity is no more associated to any owner if you delete the owner.
</code></pre>

h2. <a name="relation-syntax-one-owner">Using @Many<T>@ + owned relation</a>

bc.. public class OwnerModel {
...
	@Owned(mappedBy="owner")
	// @Owned 
	// is also valid: the mappingBy is not mandatory and if not precised, siena will find the first field having OwnerModel type
	public Many<ChildModel> child;	
...
}

p. Here is the child model:

bc.. public class ChildModel {
...
	public OwnerModel owner;	
...
}

p(note). *Note* On the child side, the _owner_ field is just written as a simple reference to the owner without any @One<T>@. Why? because, on the owned entity side, the owner is just referenced by its id/key.

p(note). *Note* On the owner side, the <code>@Owned.mappedBy</code> is used to specify which field in the child maps the owner. But the _@mappedBy@ is not mandatory_ and Siena can deduce the field by itself.

p. Using the old notation @Query<T>@, the @Many<T>@ is equivalent to:

bc.. public class OwnerModel {
...
	@Filter("owner")
	public Query<ChildModel> child;	
...
}

p. 

==<br/>==

h2. <a name="relation-syntax-one-aggregate">Using @Many<T>@ + aggregated relation</a>

p. Here is the aggregator model:

bc.. public class AggregatorModel {
...
	@Aggregated
	public Many<ChildModel> child;	
...
}

p. Here is the aggregated model:

bc.. public class AggregatedModel {
...
...
}

p(note). *Note* On the aggregated side, there is no reference to the aggregator because an aggregated entity shall not be aware of its aggregator: it's a part of it but it was not necessarily meant to be. 
It's very useful because you don't need to foresee your model will be aggregated while designing it and you can aggregate any model.
 
bq. The aggregator reference is managed by Siena itself and you don't have to deal with it neither declare it in your model.

p(note). **Note** Nevertheless, if you absolutely want to access your own aggregator, it's possible. Go to the "aggregated relation page":./relation_aggregated.html.

==<br/>==

h2. <a name="relation-syntax-many-code">Using Many<T> in your code</a>

p. The 2 important functions of @Many<T>@ are: 
* @SyncList<T> asList()@ : retrieves the elements as a SyncList which is a classic List<T> with some (re)synchronization features
* @Query<T> asQuery()@ : retrieves the elements as a siena Query<T> allowing to apply filters/orders/etc...

p. The 2 important functions of @SyncList<T>@ are: 

* @SyncList<E> sync()* : re-synchronizes only if the list was not already fetched from datastore (if the elements have changed since, it can't know it so it won't synchronize)
* @SyncList<E> forceSync()@ : forces full re-synchronization with the datastore
* @boolean addAll(F ...c)@ : a facility function missing in traditional Java List<T>
* @boolean addAll(int index, F ...c)@ : a facility function missing in traditional Java List<T>


h3. <a name="relation-syntax-many-code-insert">Associate children with @asList(T obj)@ & insert children+parent in one single call</a>

bc.. // creates dog
Dog pluto = new Dog("Pluto");
// infects dog with fleas
for(int i=0; i<10; i++){
	Flea flea = new Flea("pupuce"+i);
	pluto.fleas.asList().add(flea);
}
//saves dog + fleas in one single call
pluto.save();

p(note). *Note* You don't have to insert the children objects as Siena inserts them at the same time as the parent (if the children were not inserted yet).

p(note). *Note* using @asQuery()@ has no effect when inserting because it would try to query the datastore. Only @asList()@ when creating the parent + children.

==<br/>==

h3. <a name="relation-syntax-many-code-fetch">Retrieve the parent & get the children from parent with @gasList()@</a>

bc.. // gets the dog
Dog pluto = Dog.getByName("Pluto");
// here the fleas are not yet fetched from datastore
// ... later ...
// gets the little bloodsuckers
List<Flea> fleas = pluto.fleas.asList();

p(note). *Note* pluto.fleas is a @Many<Flea>@ so you need to use @asList()@ to fetch all the children

==<br/>==

h3. <a name="relation-syntax-many-code-insert-from-child">Create child associated to the parent one by one and retrieve all children at once</a>

p. You can first insert a parent 
p. Then, you create children along time and associate those children to the parent and insert them.
p. Finally, you can retrieve all children at once from the parent using @asList()@

bc.. // inserts dog
Dog pluto = new Dog("Pluto");
pluto.insert();

// infects dog with fleas
for(int i=0; i<10; i++){
	Flea flea = new Flea("pupuce"+i);
	// associates the flea to its dog
	flea.bloodsource = pluto;
	flea.insert();
}

// retrieves all the fleas from the dog
// gets the dog
Dog plutobis = Dog.getByName("Pluto");
// here the fleas are not yet fetched from datastore
// ... later ...
// gets the little bloodsuckers
List<Flea> fleas = plutobis.fleas.asList();

p(note). *Note* The children associate themselves to the parent but @Many<T>@ retrieves them all from the parent afterwards.


==<br/>==


h3. <a name="relation-syntax-many-code-remove-add-child">Remove/add child from @asList()@ and update parent to de-associate child from parent</a>

bc.. // removes a few flea (5 & 8) for the poor dog 
plutobis.fleas.asList().remove(5);
plutobis.fleas.asList().remove(7);
plutobis.fleas.asList().add(new Flea("pupuce10"));
// updates the dog
plutobis.update();

// retrieve again the dog and verifies the fleas 5/8 have disappeared
Dog plutoter = Dog.getByName("Pluto");
assertEquals(9, plutoter.fleas.asList().size());

// retrieves the removed fleas and verifies there are not associated to the dog anymore
Flea flea5 = Flea.getByName("pupuce5");
assertNull(flea5.bloodsource);
Flea flea8 = Flea.getByName("pupuce8");
assertNull(flea8.bloodsource);
Flea flea10 = Flea.getByName("pupuce10");
assertEquals(pluto.id, flea8.bloodsource.id);

p(note). *Note* that the children are removed from the list but they are also de-associated from the parent BUT they are NOT deleted.

==<br/>==


h3. <a name="relation-syntax-many-code-child-update">Child update is not taken in charge by Siena</a>

bc.. // gets a flea from the dog
Flea flea = pluto.fleas.asList().get(5);

flea.name = "pupuce5_UPD";

// if you update the dog, the flea is not updated
pluto.update();

// retrieves the same flea
Flea fleabis = pluto.fleas.asList().get(5);
assertFalse(flea.name.equals(fleabis.name));

// now updates the flea manually
flea.update();
		
// retrieves again the dog
pluto = Dog.getByName("Pluto");
// retrieves the same flea
fleabis = pluto.fleas.asList().get(5);
// verifies it was updated now
assertEquals(fleabis.name, flea.name);

p(note). *Note Siena JUST MANAGES THE RELATION* and do not update your objects if you modify them, *it's your responsability*

==<br/>==


h3. <a name="relation-syntax-many-code-sync">Using @asList().sync()@ and @asList().forceSync()@ to synchronize data</a>

*TO BE CONTINUED...*

h3. <a name="relation-syntax-many-code-query">Using @asQuery()@ to filter elements</a>

*TO BE CONTINUED...*