h1. Relations In Siena

In Siena, we have classified relations between models in 4 categories (at least for the time being):

h2(#reference). Reference relations
 
This is the simplest type of relation when a model is simply linked to another one in a free association. Generally, the relation is directed from an originating model to a targeted model but it doesn't own the relation nor the linked entity (generally called _unowned_). The originating entity holds a reference to the targeted entity and this reference (the key or id) is stored in the table representing the originating model (in SQL or NoSQL).

One example: a Person has a friend who is another person.

To have more info, go "there":./relation_referenced.textile
   
h2(#owned). Owned relations

This is the classical relational association in SQL world using foreign constraints. This relation is a directed and tight relation between an owning model and an owned model. It represents an entity owning one or more entities. For example: a Person has one or more dogs and one dog knows its master.
Generally, the database table representing the owning entity (in SQL & NoSQL) doesn't hold any reference to its owned entities. But the table of the owned model generally holds a reference to its owning model (the key/id plus a foreign constraint in SQL in general)

To have more info, go "there":./relation_owned.textile


h2(#aggregated). Aggregation relations

This is something coming from the NoSQL world where pure relational normalized models are not the most efficient and where redundancy and denormalization is generally a good manner.
In GAE, this is represented by the _entities group_ feature.
In SQL, it doesn't exist but can be represented using ghost tables and foreign constraints.

Here is a sample: consider a car as a group of pieces. A piece can be considered outside a car and can be stored in the "piece" table representing all the pieces available to build cars. A piece is not meant to be mounted into a given car and could be used in other things than car. But when a given piece is mounted into a car, then it belongs to this car and no other car. Moreover the car is made of these pieces and without them, it's not really a car. In this case, _we tell the car piece is aggregated to the car and the car is an aggregation of car pieces_. 

To have more info, go "there":./relation_aggregated.textile

h2(#aggregated). Embedding relations

*UNDER CONSTRUCTION*
