h1. Why a Siena Model should extend siena.Model class?

Extending the siena.Model class is not mandatory in Siena but it makes things easier (A future refactoring of Siena should reduce this dependency drastically as this block the extends slot in Java which is useful sometimes).
Some people don't like this way of doing since its blocks the single __extends__ slot provided by Java language. 

h2. *__So Why extending Model?__*

h3. __Model is the class providing the__ "Active Record Pattern":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Active_record_pattern

Model brings the following functions:

|@get();@|retrieves your model from the datastore based on the id field value|
|@insert();@|persists your model into the datastore|
|@update();@|updates your model in the datastore|
|@delete();@|deletes your model from the datastore|
|@save();@|inserts or updates your model into the datastore|

p. 
 
h3. __Model provides access to advanced utilities : Query/Batch/Async__

There are 4 static functions provided by siena.Model:

* @static <R> Query<R> all(Class<R> clazz)@

This gives access to the extended query features allowing to perform complicated query on your models to extract bunch of entities from the datastore by filtering, ordering, paginating, searching...

You can overload this function in your class in a simpler form:

bc.. public static Query<YourClass> all() {
    return Model.all(YourClass.class);
}

p. It's not mandatory and you can call @Model.all(YourClass.class)@ instead of it.

*UNDER CONSTRUCTION
*TO BE CONTINUED...*